condition while the other has an old
infection
this leaves five active cases in the
state all in hospital or many hotels
a fire has destroyed a printing business
at hindmarsh
in adelaide's inner west leaving the
building so badly damaged
it could collapse dozens of firefighters
worked for hours to bring the blaze
under control
the owners say they were on the verge of
expanding their business
but have now been left to sort through
the remains
firefighters had no option but to battle
the blaze defensively from outside
and from above after a wall collapsed
inside
it was too dangerous for them to enter
the challenge was it was a large fire
lots of dark thick smoke which meant
even though they were outside they had
to wear breathing apparatus to protect
themselves
the mfs was called to the printing
business on oasman street behind port
road
about 9 30 last night it took several
hours for crews to get the fire under
control
the large rolls of paper ink office
supplies
everything involved with the printing
business meant that it was a large fuel
load
father and son owners carlo and dion
capogreco
moved their company into the building 18
months ago and employed 10 other people
they were too upset to speak on camera
but say they had plans to hire three
more employees next year
in an expansion of the business fire
course investigators have attended the
business this morning
but haven't been able to determine the
cause of the fire due to the threat of
the building collapsing
firefighters were able to prevent major
damage to the adjoining properties
but a wall next door to a medical clinic
has been severely damaged
forcing the closure of its car park
we'll try and contact someone today just
to see exactly how we're going to get
access
if we can get access or yeah i mean
we've got another clinic at prospect
that we may be able to choose for all
our patients too
and for the time being but it's the
other allied health that won't be able
to access the building
the damage bill has been estimated at
one million dollars
but the owners say there was two million
dollars of stock and machinery inside
they plan to relocate as quickly as
possible to get the business back up and
running
brittany evans abc news adelaide in
cricket
stand in skipper jinka rouhani has
scored a defiant
century to give india a strong lead at
the stumps on day two of the boxing day
test
at the mcg earlier the australian quicks
clawed their way back into the match but
a patient rahani combined with
ravindra jadaja put the tourists in a
strong position heading into day three
day two ball one
[Applause]
and the australians thought they had
their second wicket
it turned gloomy at the g but india's
good fortunes began
india played and missed but cummins
persistence
paid off that's the edge of the catch
and the skipper made up for his earlier
miss oh he's got it this time he's
absolutely got it
the indians kept living on the edge the
match evenly poised at lunch
nathan lyon had no problem turning it
before causing
issues for hanuma
and buhari richard pant was off the mark
before his first ball
but his energy produced some much-needed
runs
pant's stroke play was cut short when
mitchell stark
claimed his 250th test wicket
gone big flash of the bat and mitch
stark strikes again
stand-in skipper ajinkyo rahane stood up
to post a patient half century
before the clouds forced the covers to
come on a tee
the cameras turned to an injured david
warner putting his groin to the test
india kept picking the gaps oh
and that is a stroke of luck as they
passed australia's first
innings score a good period for india
followed as rouhani combined with
ravindra jadeja in a crucial partnership
the second new ball was due but the
third umpire wasn't quite ready for it
neither was steve smith and whether he
just hasn't picked it up
australia's tight pace attack started to
loosen
and india took control the message was
clear
and rouhani
indian delivered ajinka rohana goes to
travis head dropped a sitter into a pair
of hands
no as wild weather ended the day's play
rouhani remains unbeaten on 104 with
india in front by 82 runs
tom maddox abc news melbourne
let's now quite take a quick look at the
weather before we go for monday mostly
sunny in brisbane storms for sydney and
canberra
partly cloudy in melbourne hobart in
adelaide sunny in perth
and showers with a possible storm for
you there in darwin
well that's the latest from abc news
remember you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net.u
and on eyeview i'm maryam saab thank you
for your company
[Applause]
[Music]
know the story anytime anywhere with abc
news online
head to news.abc.net.u or download the
new abc news app
a summer of entertainment awaits on abc
eye view
anywhere anytime put me in it
your summertime streaming is on abc eye
view
a league and w league football is on
live and free every single weekend
the rivalries the goals
[Music]
every weekend on abc and streaming
it's the way that i feel when i'm
looking at you
doing the things that you do
you're mad i'm mad you're mad
[Music]
we're all man good evening
and welcome to news at six last thing i
need right now is to get involved with a
married woman
i've got my reputation to think of what
do you know about what i want to achieve
let's just pretend that we live in the
real world where else would you rather
be
it's jack jack
[Music]
abc tv plus is here
hey how you doing
[Music]
a magical space it's brilliant i did not
expect
to feel this kind of child like
are you from another planet
[Music]
i've been to many wonderful places but
none more extraordinary
than here there's a pleasure in seeing
someone do something really weird
i am having a great time
there was nothing quite like that
anticipation builds
it's more than just comedy abc tv plus
starts january 1 9
8 this new year's eve the parties at
yours stay home with the abc
for the biggest night of the year
at 8 30 join ro for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
know the tradition castle bird brings
the land back to life
know the reason the most important thing
to me as a gundankara person
is protecting country for future
generations know the languages
reporting from our in the country lara
kia country reporting from ghana country
reporting from pinematic
from larakir country i'm on your toyota
country from
nepaluna lutrowita for abc news
know the meaning i in this country this
country is me
know the story with abc
has been in news
so probes here at the brief we're
looking back on the year that was and
who could forget that period around
march when we were still trying to
figure out what was going on with the
coronavirus pandemic
and all of a sudden australians were
being asked to live with these
restrictions these new rules that we'd
never had to live with before
and never before have australians been
so interested
in what happens in this place because it
was these press conferences with the
prime minister and brendan murphy
that was telling australians how their
life was going to change
these press conferences literally
changed people's lives
businesses closed we were told we
couldn't travel
any longer certainly couldn't go
overseas
people were losing jobs and then we had
this awful scene within days of these
announcements
centerlink queues it was the new modern
hungry mile things were changing
so rapidly as you said people were so
hungry for information
and we also saw this new setup what the
prime minister called
a national cabinet the prime minister
and the premiers and chief ministers
coming together
to try to figure out how to deal with
this crisis and the national cabinet
that effectively
replaced the opposition for the premiers
they all had to get together to make
these life-changing decisions
very few events whether natural
disasters terrorism
or financial collapse cause the kind of
global disruption
and rapid change that we're experiencing
right now australia has introduced
unprecedented travel restrictions to
slow the spread of covet 19.
just how huge the economic hit is here
this is
huge
thousands of doctors are warning that
australia faces an
italy-style disaster unless drastic
measures are taken immediately
we are upgrading the travel ban on
australians
to level four for the entire world
that is the first time that has ever
happened in australia's history
so the federal government is warning
that the coronavirus pandemic will
continue for at least
six months there is no two-week answer
to what we're confronting there is no
short-term quick fix to how this is
dealt with in australia
these are difficult days and they may
get much more difficult yet
[Music]
we'll continue to rely on the medical
advice and we'll make decisive judgments
as appropriate and as required
we should all practice good hygiene we
should wash our hands the more we can do
to separate people and to stop that
infection spreading the better
at the moment it's social distancing and
trying to keep
people apart from one another the news
just in on this that not all politicians
will be returning
to canberra only 90 mps in the house of
representatives next week
also there'll be no public members
allowed to watch
it's a little bit different with these
lines in place as a bit of a marker as
to how to keep our distance
it's been crazy lots of things been
happening this week we had that
huge press conference with scott
morrison yesterday announcing the
gathering ban of 100 or more people the
peaks to come out of this press
conference went for about an hour but
for me the most interesting thing
was the stern word from the pm to
absolutely
stop it yeah that was a real moment
where morrison
was perhaps the strongest he's been
during the crisis
stop hoarding i can't be more blunt
about it
stop it it's not sensible
[Music]
one of the major things that he wanted
to really hit home was
an end to all this panic and the anxiety
that is spreading across the community
no doubt we're dealing with something
that's completely unprecedented but he
really called for calm particularly in
regards to
the supermarket something i think we've
all taken for granted or we've now got a
new appreciation of
you're the rural reporter you know how
much food do we have
we've got so much food the fact that um
supermarkets are running out
is just bonkers some of the the
supermarkets have said they've been
working as though they're feeding 50
million australians this
week
[Music]
i don't think i've ever lived in a
journalistic environment where
there's only one story when there's only
one story it's usually for one or two
days
and i think it's interesting as well you
go for coffee or coffee via skype now
with friends and you don't really talk
about anything else it's pretty
exhausting
the economy is bracing for a hit as bad
as any downturn this nation has seen
remember it was last thursday that we
were talking about this first stimulus
package
the situation has deteriorated so much
that we are now
talking about a second stimulus package
the government will today unveil its
latest rescue plan to help
package of measures combined with those
we've already announced
sums to some 189 billion dollars
for around 10 percent of the size of our
economy
10 of the size of our economy that is
unprecedented
in this country the scale of this
spending dwarfs the stimulus during the
global financial crisis
but one thing's clear it won't be enough
to stop a recession
that's considered inevitable 66 billion
on one day
and yet it was second in the bulletins
across
all bulletins because
the amazing move to basically clamp down
on normal life
in half a day a day this parliament is
going to contend with 80 odd billion
dollars of money
the most it would have ever dealt with
in a short period which both sides
largely agree on
because it's the only economic lifeline
they think that they can throw out to
keep the country
so they're conscious of not staying here
for too long because there was great
concern that you bring politicians in
from across australia and you
potentially
bring coronavirus here to parliament
house so
that real need to push through billions
of dollars in one day we've never seen
before but
mainly for health health reasons but
look at how the argument's gone as well
in the space of three
four five weeks we've gone from talk of
the surplus
to deficit suddenly we've gone from
deficit
to recession recessions assured now it's
incredible to say that
incredible we've had 29 consecutive
years
of growth but now we're looking at a
depression
a depression the national cabinet the
prime minister is referring to
there is meeting as we speak well thank
you for joining us
this evening and i want to take you
through some new rules
just after half past nine from canberra
they confirmed that licensed clubs pubs
cinemas casinos
nightclubs and places of worship have
been ordered to close
one of the big things the prime
minister's talked a lot about is the
formation of this national cabinet the
first of its kind it brings together him
the premiers the chief ministers
they all get together a couple of times
a week to make sure the approach across
the country is consistent
but on sunday you're starting to see a
bit of a change happening where he's
announced this
66 billion dollar stimulus package but
the states are starting to say we want
to close
our schools we're thinking that we need
to crack down on pubs and clubs
because we're worried about the spread
of this virus seems to be a bit of a
back down from what
a number of states were pushing for
today new south wales victoria and the
act
pushing for the closure of virtually
everything but
essential services that is no longer
happening and you can understand why new
south wales and victoria were pushing
for
stronger social distancing rules because
they're the two states that have
the highest number of cases and they're
the two states where cases are
escalating
quite quickly and we saw both of those
states starting to push for change but
with that came confusion because there
was no official announcement so
you had a number of small businesses
going can i open tomorrow
can i not no decision during this period
has been black or white
every decision they've made whether it
be an economic decision or a
medical decision has been in the graze
which means that every decision is
contentious
debatable and able to be criticized and
this is why it's so
awful for the government for the medical
experts advising because there's always
someone saying well i'm not sure if
that's right
parliament also returns today it might
be
just one day it might be two the reason
politicians
have returned here a reduced number not
as many as usual
is to pass those two massive economic
stimulus packages
rarely has a session been so critical or
met in such unusual circumstances
i thank members for their cooperation in
forbearance during this
difficult and extraordinary time we
gather today
at a time of great challenge for our
nation
and indeed the world when they finally
got around to sitting
in the chamber it's this real clinical
sterile environment the tendon's got
gloves on
no one's being delivered a glass of
water there's big gaps around everyone
but
but that was pretty straightforward what
was happening there out in the real
world though
was panic there's lines forming around
centrelink as people want to get access
to this welfare that the government says
it's going to provide
and the terrifying figure that the
government released saying i think one
million people
will need welfare as a result of this
coronavirus
crisis and then we saw the website my
gup which is what you need to go on to
if you
need centrelink support that crash now
the figures with that are incredible so
on a normal day
about 6000 people go on mygov on monday
over 100 000 people were on it when it
crashed weren't they hacked that's why
it crashed
stuart robert comes out a lacks empathy
b comes and says that it's some sort of
cyber attack
it was probably the worst performance of
the last few weeks
it was it was so crass
[Music]
at the moment it's what i'm looking at
the clock it's 8 30 at night and we've
still got a long way to go especially if
there are amendments and it has to go
back
to the house it's really going to be a
long one tonight it's such a weird
feeling in the building tonight because
usually there's lots of politicians
coming around to say hello wanting to do
late night interviews
the building's like a ghost town you
know there's probably some
quiet negotiations going on in matthias
corman's office right now but
that's about it otherwise it's the bare
minimum
and we're talking about the biggest
amount of money ever being rushed
through in the shortest amount of time i
think i can ever recall
the numbers are mind-boggling we're
talking about billions of dollars but
now we're getting kind of used to each
day
having a new announcement to report on
about these huge figures the bills have
passed the second
reading in the senate but they're going
through the committee stage in the third
reading
ultimately this is going to go through
anyway it's just a matter of time now
really
the question is that the amendment be
agreed to
all those of that opinion say aye to the
country no
the eyes have it the house stands
adjourned until a date
an hour to be fixed in accordance with
the resolution agreed to
earlier this city
how weird is this extraordinary isn't it
the galleries here the public areas of
the parliament shut down
a soul it is eerie and
the fact is we don't know when it's
going to come back to life again
for those of us going through this
period maybe it's useful to remember
that though it's
scary it's unnerving
it's also a fascinating most amazing
moment
in human history and that's one thing
that's helped me
get through this because the alternative
is horrifying
[Music]
by april it had become clear that huge
amounts of government support was going
to be needed to help australians through
this crisis
and all of a sudden you had parliament
passing record amounts of spending in a
really short period of time in fact jay
there was one day
where parliament passed a hundred and
thirty billion dollars worth
of government support to businesses and
to jobs
and this is from a coalition whose
ideology
was all about the private sector doing
all the heavy lifting
but this was government intervention on
a massive
scale these were decisions that were
critical to keeping jobs alive
and businesses on life support for
months ahead
and as you said earlier the the
decisions that were being made the pace
at which everything was changing meant
that
all of a sudden you had people who
probably would never normally watch a
press conference with the prime minister
or the chief medical officer
they were glued to their tvs glued to
their phones to find out
what was going to change for them and
probes that put
extra spotlight i think on the
journalists and i think of everything
that happened in 2020
you probably didn't expect to become a
tick-tock star
jay that i certainly didn't
pretty empty corridors thing it used to
be
that we have quite repetitive places as
well you know the blue room
mural hall they're always the same but
now
it's even more reduced they're literally
three places that
we take pictures headshots you know of
politicians
so that makes it even harder to to get
some sort of
interesting picture but that's uh that's
our job
i love it
before the social distancing started you
know we
we had a few more subjects i guess
several ministers but you know now we
have the prime minister who is
still the same and then there's a new
guy that before two months ago
no one knew him you know brandon murphy
he's similar to
being deputy prime minister you have to
learn their
mannerisms brandon murphy doesn't give
much
okay let's go
[Music]
oh yeah i think that'll do me the
pictures are
no gold just a lot of bread and butter
this is getting very very real for
australians as the coronavirus breaks
havoc
in the us and europe here in australia
some better news
the spread is not as bad as it has been
in many other countries
americans have been warned to prepare
for a week of mass fatalities british
prime minister boris johnson has been
taken to
hospital while the death toll in italy
has risen to more than fifteen
thousand today we go further we go
much further this week we announced a
130 billion dollar
package to support job keeper all around
the country
what this means is is these employees
won't be going to centrelink they won't
be engaging with the social security
system
they'll be engaging directly with their
employer it was a defining
week in this crisis one that could
reshape our politics
almost from the moment that the
government announced the second stimulus
there was this talk that a third one
was coming and when the prime minister
finally got up and announced it
there were gasps in the office an
unfathomable amount of money 130
billion dollars for the job keeper
program and it was like that down in the
courtyard when we heard it because we
haven't
seen such numbers talked about
in one measure one measure 130 billion
dollars to put that in perspective now
they spent something like 10 of gdp
throwing it at this crisis it's a lot of
money basically they are
putting the economy into hibernation
that's now the kind of extraordinary
circumstance we find ourselves in so the
whole notion of this job keeper package
is to pay businesses to keep their
employees on the books like they don't
even have to necessarily be working it's
just to keep that connection between
a business and their worker that's right
here we are kings hall
old parliament house a building that's
seen its fair share of national crises
but the lesson of recessions
is that once someone loses a job it's
very hard
to get that job back in fact it's
sometimes could put
when it comes to the connection between
that person and a job
legislation being introduced this week
for that job
keeper payment politicians will be
heading back to canberra
on wednesday to debate this legislation
afternoon again everyone good to go the
government has ruled out allowing more
casual workers to access its job keeper
wage subsidy
more than a million casuals miss out it
was some really interesting maneuvering
from the government
it didn't talk to the labor party it
talked to the union movement
so we had christian porter and sally
mcmanus
boss of the actu christian porter
described
her as his best first friend
forever bff best first friend for now he
told us
on casuals it's obviously a point of
contention with the actu
will the bill go to the parliament
tomorrow pretty much as it's written now
on that
on that issue yeah i think there's going
to be an agreement to disagree on on
casuals
um that the actu's position as i
understand labour's is is different from
the government
political ideology i mean it's suddenly
everything's being tested
left right for center yeah well i mean
ideology
is very often well applied all the time
yeah
but it's applied in normal times these
aren't normal times i mean none of us
have ever seen anything like this none
of us ever thought we would
so you i think have to put the playbook
down
because the playbook you know works for
monday to friday at a usual game day
this is not a usual game day
[Music]
imagine if one of the bright shining
lights to come out of it is a new kind
of
approach of bipartisanship and an
approach where
ideologies truly are thrown out the
window and you do actually see
unions businesses governments working
together and that's what
this building has shown in the past that
at moments of national crises there have
been both sides
working together to defeat the common
enemy
the government will today release
scientific modelling on the spread of
coronavirus
we have to model for the worst case
scenario there have been calls
for several weeks from experts and from
the opposition for the government to
release
its modeling i guess it's rationale for
putting in place these measures
we have so far avoided the horror
scenarios
that we have seen overseas the
government was under pressure for weeks
to release the modeling that they'd been
receiving about what coronavirus was
doing
in in australia now i don't know about
you i failed maths at first year uni i'm
no statistician that can analyze this
stuff
but the prime minister finally agreed to
just release all the modeling that they
that the government's been getting yeah
but there were huge caveats attached to
it right so when they finally released
the modelling and
likewise mouse was not my strong suit my
mind was just blown because
it was based on international data they
hadn't plugged any australian cases into
the system
it was modelling three possible
scenarios but
none of them were based on australian
scenarios so it was really kind of
difficult to actually interpret what the
modeling was
which also uh makes it a bit difficult
for the government to show the way out
if you're trying to navigate a path then
you want to see
some actual australian data
the federal parliament resumes today to
pass the government's massive 130
billion dollar job keeper package
the government's emergency wage subsidy
scheme is expected to pass
the federal parliament today
treasurer thank you for your time now we
have this historic legislation coming
through today
we're joined by the federal treasurer
josh freidenberg good to be with you mel
we are absolutely focused on is getting
the support to people who
need it most listen and learn
we can't do that we can't exactly
never has anything like the 130 billion
dollar wage subsidy bill being before
the parliament
labour waved the white flag early they
said we're going to try for the casuals
but ultimately we will pass it we will
not be leaving today
until this thing passes yeah i mean we
saw amendments from labour the greens um
rex patrick from
central alliance the senate did sit
quite late into the night but as
expected it all passed
actually at some points during that day
i forgot that parliament was even
sitting because the number of people in
parliament house has just
thinned out um so dramatically but um
yeah it was a pretty
unremarkable day but the legislation
they were passing was hugely
consequential this is the greatest
economic crisis to afflict the world in
many generations
we have responded with the biggest
economic lifeline
in australia's history this is good
legislation
it will make a difference so all those
of that opinion say aye the contrary no
these bills have been agreed to okay
that's done government front benchers
are leaving the house of representatives
as we speak
they've just signed off on 130 billion
dollars
in wage subsidy it's not yet law it's
got to go across to the other side of
the parliament
that's where the senate is labor's
expected to get on board
to give you an indication though of just
how on board they all are with this
it's now 4 30. the parliament's at 10
o'clock so in six and a half hours
these politicians have signed off on
some of the biggest legislation we're
ever to see
yeah it was the most almost the most
antithetical of days
because usually the more expensive the
more controversial the more draconian
the more scrutiny but it was actually
the other way we had
no scrutiny really because of the deal
that the government stitched up with the
actu
so they'd done the the the back room
deals they got
they a couple of tickles here
i'm sorry i'm sorry andrew
i know but you don't run the press
conference okay it's about the only time
that my kids have
ever taken any notice of what their old
man does
having beaten out every radio station
host across the country every comedian i
scored the
first exclusive interview with andrew
proven new tick tock superstar oh my
goodness how did this even happen probes
did you even know what tick tock was
no i didn't know what tik tok was i i
was shown something by my son my older
son
and he said hey dad have you seen this
so i'm going to add
other questions to members of the group
catherine has another question
i'm happy to return to you but let's
just keep it civil
catherine yes how do we arrange for me
to meet mr probing
hello brooklyn how are you
really well you've become a bit of a a
sensation
yeah look it's all of you i've
accidentally made you a tick tock star
why is it that then it's become a bit of
a hit i mean it it is still
it's kind of bizarre because we live and
breathe this
are people like you watching politics a
lot more closely because of coronavirus
um i think it's almost like tick-tock
was a very young market so everyone was
like between the ages of like
12 to 16 there wasn't really an older
demographic
and when i joined tick-tock it was a lot
of dancing there was a couple of like
funny people and that's why i joined it
and then i started posting political
stuff and people enjoyed it and i was
shocked but i think it is because
everyone's inside
all the older generations when i say
older i mean like
my age um have now downloaded tik tok
and
i think the political like slash news
style content is more so
for them because like they're not really
interested in the dancing but it's not
relevant whereas like okay this is part
of their life but it's kind of funny so
it's like okay yeah we can relate
so i think that's why maybe it did hit
off andrew i know but you don't run the
press conference okay
so i'm going to go to other questions of
members of the of the group
catherine hasn't had a question i'm
happy to return to you but let's just
keep it civil
andrew
[Music]
catherine again i'm going to go
back to the original question why do
people think andre
you don't run the press conference just
kidding i want to say it for so long
um why the original video because like
what prime minister starts yelling at
like a journalist
in the middle of a conference like are
you kidding
he's the k he's scotty from marketing
you should know that's not that's a pr
nightmare what are you doing bro like
calm down he just started yelling and i
was like no
i have one question though yeah when
covid is over
can i come to a press conference yes of
course i reckon we would get the i think
we'll get the prime minister to uh
to try and meet you i think because i
think he's found it funny
how's he actually has he seen them stop
it can't wait
maybe i can run the press conference
[Music]
[Laughter]
we are in a war against this virus this
is parliament's dunkirk member the type
of war we have never
seen before there's been a lot of talk
about the war fitting that we're on
two men who know all about that are john
curtin and his treasurer ben chifley
this man oversees a war effort and then
he dies in office and chiefly ultimately
takes over and has to map out the
recovery of what the the country was
going through yeah so if we liken the
coronavirus to the latest war that this
world is facing i mean
scott morrison is really trying to
occupy this dual role of
getting us through this crisis and then
leading the eventual recovery but i mean
probes
spit early to be talking about the
recovery because we're still in the
midst of it and we still don't actually
know what the pathway out of this
coronavirus crisis is
yeah so it's quite clear that the
government thinks that it's done maybe
to 90 of all of the economic and social
structure
that's going to provide that recovery
200 billion worth
it's been gobsmackingly expensive
gobsmacking
the task now is to navigate out now the
prime minister has almost got that war
cabinet it's the national cabinet
a war cabinet that these guys would have
been familiar with
but the national cabinet is trying to
work out a way
for this federation for the federal
government for the states to
to get us out of this coronavirus crisis
because it looks like it's going to be
with us for
many many months if not years if it goes
well morrison might get himself a statue
down there on the lake as well it will
and if it does
if it goes well they'll deserve one
let's face it
[Music]
on earth we call
we share a dream
we are
[Music]
i am
australian we are
[Music]
australian
china has said that an outbreak of an
unknown viral pneumonia is not
the respiratory disease sound of hong
kong says it's likely a brand new viral
pneumonia
experts reportedly found a new corona
virus that uh traces back to the
outbreak um that we are seeing in han
so far 59 people have been infected with
the virus like most people i can recall
seeing
small articles in the newspaper around
around this pandemic that was
potentially breaking out in wuhan
new viral pneumonia in china is on the
move
the chinese government says it's
spreading from animal to humans
scientists here say human to human
transmission
can't be ruled out china says the number
of people infected by a mysterious
respiratory virus
has more than tripled over the weekend
there are now
218 confirmed cases of the new corona
virus
it sounded like something that would
probably stay away and be a
a low-grade sort of episode something
that people would struggle to remember
a couple of years from now round zero
for this mysterious virus
and it's also showing up in other cities
as well as japan
thailand and south korea the concern of
course how to stop it from spreading
more than 400 people have been infected
with the coronavirus
and nine people have died han is in
virtual lockdown
in the city of 11 million people you're
not allowed to enter
any public space without a mask 26
people have died so far after
contracting the
virus which attacks the respiratory
system
all of those deaths have been in china
mostly in and around
wuhan but now there have been two deaths
outside who played problems so the world
health organization has said it
doesn't yet consider it to be a global
health emergency
[Music]
[Applause]
definitely in my mind there was concern
and a small closed
group of people that i'm in touch with
that monitor these things
you know and have done through our
careers
i spent three days in hospital in the
early stages of covered and i can tell
you the anxiety levels there were
were extraordinary that the healthcare
workers were really concerned about what
might lie ahead
they took all the necessary precautions
but they knew in the backs of their
minds they were putting themselves at
risk
but they did it anyway you've really got
to admire the way that healthcare
workers in this country just rallied
around
and did what they had to do
it's about 4am and i'm recording my
first
video diary and this is my first video
diary
i'm gonna be just documenting a few
little videos
how do i feel right now
i feel really scared
basically
it's going to disappear one day it's
like a miracle it will disappear
we believe that the risk of a global
pandemic is very much upon us
and as a result as a government
we need to take the steps necessary to
prepare
for such a pandemic i think it was
important declaring the pandemic early
and unfortunately the who has been
slowing
every single important new bit of
information
compared to the scientific community
scott morrison called it and he was
right
what happened in march is the most
significant
moment in the pandemic control in
australia
in march i think australia was really
gripped by this fear of what this could
become
and we saw it in the seriousness with
which our political leaders
took the situation
what's down here down here there are
masks
nappies toilet paper i've also bought
some seeds
just in case there's an interruption to
the fresh food supply chain
the prime minister announced a few days
ahead of time that restrictions were
necessary
and then he said i'm going the footy
this weekend i'm looking forward to it
well that sent the wrong message to all
australians i don't think everyone
anyone really grasped
how severe this was going to get and how
serious it was going to get and
i think all of us kind of um probably
clung to that desire to just live our
normal lives
we will close our border a travel ban
will be placed
on all non-residents three billion
people
in almost 70 countries and territories
have been asked to stay at home
just didn't check passports or anything
didn't ask any favors or any health
checks or that it was just
straight on down in the middle of this
crisis where the most
obvious problem was this virus
the ruby princess chugs into sydney
harbour
full of sick people all of whom are
allowed to disembark and
fan out across airports just absolutely
extraordinary they were herded off the
ruby princess
like cattle passports were not checked
id cards were not checked i found it was
very frightening
because i thought one lady on the ship
had died
and that upset me and i thought well
dear i don't want to be the next one
children should go to school tomorrow
there are no change there is no change
to the medical expert advice
for practical reasons we are encouraging
parents to keep their students at home
bring forward the school holidays
i don't think there's any doubt in
retrospect that had the federal
government been left to its own
resources then the restrictions wouldn't
have been
as tight businesses
will close because of the restrictions
we have put in place
those images of people queuing around
the block at every centre link in
australia were
massively attention focusing for the
government i think
my name's jennifer i'm a recently
qualified medical oncologist
i feel like i'm standing on a beach
along with everyone else
uh watching the tsunami roll in and just
so unsure of what it's going to look
like or feel like in the next couple of
weeks
let alone months i've just put my hand
up to do some clinical work
let's back up for when this happens
i shook hands with everybody you'll be
pleased to know and i continue to shake
hands
british prime minister boris johnson has
now been admitted
to the hospital he has symptoms of
chronic virus mass graves for an
unprecedented crisis
this is america we're continuing to
study this virus
every moment of every day
i see the disinfectant where it knocks
it out
in a minute one minute and is there a
way we can do something like that
by injection inside or
hi my name is luke delaroo i'm an
emergency medicine registrar at the
royal melbourne hospital
at the moment there are no patients
waiting which is actually pretty rare
for
four am in the morning believe it or not
clearly people
are paying attention and staying at home
another week in the covered pandemic
diary
um i've just finished a stint um
working as a locum um as an oncologist
which has been quite interesting each
time you feel a tickle in your throat
you'll need to sneeze
you're terrified that you might infect
your patients
my name's bridget and i'm an intensive
care nurse at the alfred hospital
i've been working in the covered pod
today it's a strange place to work you
walk in there and
everyone's in their their gowns and
their masks and their goggles and you
don't recognize people
and it's like being on a different
planet really
one of these procedures is putting
breathing tubes in
covert positive patients it's not a very
nice thing to do when a patient's awake
and you've got to
take over their breathing for them
because they need that oxygen so badly
and they're not getting it
usually i'm able to switch off after
shifts
but the last couple of days i haven't
been sleeping great
i've been working in the covied area in
the icu
we've had some patients in for two three
weeks stints and have had no relatives
relative contact the i guess the biggest
change we've noticed is there's been a
huge amount of drunk and alcohol related
presentations
we've been battling that for the last
few nights that's been a big change and
i think that's a reflection of the fact
that
you know people people are struggling
with the social isolation and
self-medicating
[Music]
coronavirus pandemic has claimed now
more than 100 000 lives in america
this will become another icu um
you can see it's super creepy to be
walking around here
the isolation rules sort of lifting in
the next couple of days
i'm a bit nervous about people going
back to work and
having social gatherings again
i'm up in toowoomba at my other job just
getting ready to go and pick up a
patient
working the helicopter this week
the airport is properly deserted never
really seen it like this before there's
no one around really at all
i had a close contact with a colleague
who is subsequently tested positive for
chronovirus
um after we worked together on my last
couple of night shifts and so
that means i'm out in melbourne i think
the second wave happened because of a
combination of bad management and bad
luck
private security guards were used at
hotel quarantine and then once the
outbreak happened victoria didn't have
the same capability that two or three of
the other states had
that is they weren't able to contain it
many countries that believed they were
past the worst
are now grappling with new outbreaks
we've gone from discharging our last
covert patient
back home to be with their family to
seeing
triple digit numbers and new cases in
victoria
i think everyone's feeling quite on edge
for what is to come
i think there's going to be a lot of
very burnt out people
in the next couple of months if this
turns into be another
big wave the numbers are
worse than we ever would have imagined
them being at this point
the staff morale is really low and
i know people were more scared at work
than what they've been
in the past nine public housing towers
in those postcodes will be the subject
of a complete
lock down effective uh
immediately i realized that we're in
complete lockdown as in
we can't go back for exercise can't go
out for work we can't go get groceries
and um any essentials either
you can see police presence on every
access point
it's scary it is traumatic
and i live here you're going to go
inside and sleep in your building
you have no right and authority to tell
me what to do
[Music]
you can see cops everywhere there are
every exit point every entrance point
just patrolling the area i
understand the intentions behind it but
the way it was
like gone about was completely wrong
like we should have had a heads up or
warning
i think at the time the victorian
government they knew the situation was
serious
um they'd already tried a lot of things
like taking testing out to
local communities vans and so on if
everything else is failing
that's a last resort is to lock down 275
new cases since
our last update 374 new cases
484 that's 403 new cases
since we last reported 300 new cases
that's 357 new since we last updated you
8 696 coronavirus cases in victoria
that's 532
new that is an increase of 384
first things first there are 9
998 cumulative
cases of coronavirus in the victorian
community 723
news since we last updated you
it's felt like just holding your breath
every day
a constant state of anxiety waiting for
those numbers to come out in the morning
and just praying that you know we're
going to go back to normal
relatively soon
you will no longer be able to leave home
or go any further away from your home
than a five kilometer radius there will
be a curfew
across metropolitan melbourne from 8 p.m
this evening
except for antarctica infections have
been reported
on all continents this week we will
reach
20 million registered cases of covet 19
and 750
000 days today they announced that we
have to go into stage four lockdown
i've had a lot of staff members who have
tested positive
colleagues who have been off sick
colleagues that have ended up in a
hospital
have a colleague at the moment who's
injured in an icu
still seeing some pretty frustrating
stuff at work so i've just done a run of
four nights
you know we had to look after someone
who had a blood alcohol of 0.5
after being out after curfew at a party
things definitely look like they're
amping up now um
ports of melbourne are getting really
scary especially hearing about doctors
in intensive care following
swabbing patients it's also feeling
a lot more real with all wearing masks
both in and out of the hospital
um yep
definitely feeling like we're on the
edge of the knife at the moment
i'm finding it pretty tricky to
completely switch off from work that i'm
almost feeling a little bit guilty for
having days off
i've just done a big 12-hour shift i
guess the one thing i wanted to quickly
comment on is the
quite a few covered positives in but
they seem to be a lot sicker than
uh earlier on in the year i'm on
paternity leave at the moment just had a
baby on wednesday
but um we haven't had access i haven't
been able to go and see my wife or
newborn daughter
been hanging out with this little fella
and yeah it's been a bit challenging
[Music]
this has to be the biggest
public policy failure by a state
government in living memory
[Music]
i've never seen melbourne like this
before i mean just you know we walk the
dog there's no one around there's no
cars around
seeing those extraordinary images of
melbourne
totally shut down was area it was almost
biblical nothing was moving
across the country nursing home
residents account for almost
60 per cent of coronavirus deaths
amongst
the worst in the world
we need to understand that putting
people in isolation
has detrimental effects all of its own
like my mother-in-law who who passed a
few years ago would say you know
look after the grand grand shane we
built this country you know
and
[Music]
we owe them better
i need to go
the cracks in our aged care system
just showed up so clearly 685 aged care
residents
died and we were forced
to see the weaknesses in our aged care
system
where underpaid workers struggle to cope
with an overload of work
[Music]
mr speaker this is a devastating day for
australia
can the prime minister confirm that
australia has plunged into
the worst recession in almost a century
these are the darkest economic times
since the great depression
it has crossed my mind that maybe at
this age i won't be able to get another
job
i guess i'm afraid that i'm not really
going to be able to get
full-time work and that it's going to be
a struggle
it's been a year of a lot of highs and
lowest lows kind of you have the all in
between
it's still spreading that's what worries
me
and we're developing a vaccine in record
time
it will be ready before the end of the
year
feeling pretty burnt out actually
nothing really to do outside of work
nothing to kind of
you know help you relax can't go to the
park or catch up with mate so that's
fine that kind of challenging plus i was
supposed to get married in a couple
months and i've had to delay that and i
was supposed to be in queensland
so uh i can't even go to the supermarket
at the moment
she's bleeding from the nose today which
is new
and annoying
at 76 new cases since yesterday that's
43 new cases
since that's just 12 new cases since my
report yesterday
so i've come into work tonight and this
covered pod
is almost completely empty
we're almost at the end of stage for
lockdown in melbourne we've got
community transmission
on the downtrend and very few cases very
few new cases
daily not being able to interact with
patients in the way that you normally
would
offering a smile some reassurance you
know underneath all that ppe
is really hard we're going to establish
this new covert norm that everyone keeps
talking about
the idea of having to wear
all that crap every day
is really hard i'm tired i need a
holiday i've got a holiday coming up
hopefully i'll be able to go somewhere
more than five kilometers from my house
hopefully i'll be able to see some
family and friends that i haven't seen
for months
we're a very very fortunate country we
weren't put in a position
where people were choosing who gets a
ventilator
and who doesn't you know that's really
something to be proud of
in the last few minutes it's been
confirmed by president trump
that he and his wife have tested
positive
for coronavirus
germany spain italy
all living under tighter restrictions
this morning
[Music]
there are zero new cases across our
state the last time we recorded zero
cases was 139 days ago
we are able to say that now is the time
to open up
i think unless you've lived through it
you really don't understand
how we've been impacted i've got a
daughter
and a grandson who lives in ballarat
with mr madily
i see my daughter see my
i see my grandson and
yeah look it it was a relief not as much
as we expected but
it will come and it will happen
restrictions
[Music]
the biggest thing i would remember the
year for is having to be adaptable
applying for jobs
i don't even know the number that i
would have applied for it's probably
upwards of 50 i would say
i've pretty much been applying
everywhere
my 2020 has been a bit of
an emotional rollercoaster or not being
able to see the grandkids was the worst
bit about 2020.
that was pretty awful it was only a
short time but it was a long enough
my family was doing pretty badly with it
my dad was unemployed
the whole time and it was it was kind of
a bad time but it's looking up now
i will always remember the 66 patients
that passed personally i'm i'm
physically
tired sometimes i feel so tired point of
exhaustion
i'm emotionally tired and i think i'm
psychologically tired
and it has been traumatic
i often reflect and um think back on the
families particularly of those
patients that we lost that died because
of covert
there were some really distressing
stories and family situations that we
saw
i think our lives in healthcare have
irrevocably changed because of this
pandemic
[Music]
you can feel it in the streets that we
all
oh sorry i am crying now we all
took on these really you know pretty
hard rules to live by and we were doing
it for each other
i think we started to understand how
much we take for granted the ability to
visit each other
the ability to hug each other the
ability to come together when we want to
and to come home when we want to and the
best part of the concluding parts of
this year
was the ability to touch each other
again
the best bits throughout 2020 would be
reconnecting with friends we can't bring
family being able to see them again
victoria you go first we love you and
miss you so
much i can't believe it oh that's some
chockies for the hospital a city is ugly
without people and it's hideous
next year i hope that for the rest of
the world
that we can get on top of covet
i have a lot of hopes for 2021 that
we'll come back stronger and more
connected
what i hope for 2021 is we keep building
relationships and friendships with
people we might not have known before
happy
we can be here
just